atomic_cell: compare value last (#14183)
scylladb/scylladb: docs/cql/dml.rst

nodes are not guaranteed to be globally unique.
With a steadily high write rate timestamp collision
is not unlikely. If it happens, i.e. two ``INSERTS`` have the same

> timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which if the inserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>`).

Reviewer: This phrasing (also before your change, but also after) seems to suggest than one of the two INSERTS will prevail, while in reality, under some conditions, the result can be a weird mix of the two (with each column getting the maximum value from the two inserts).

Author: I agree that the text is quite vague but taking it simply, it does imply that the INSERT is considered in whole, rather than selecting which cell will prevail, individually.

We can add a note about that in the update-ordering section.

Author: Also, not that we can't guarantee that "insert atomicity" if neither of the inserts have a TTL.
In that case, the cells values are used for cell selection, independently, and the result could very well be a mixture of the inserts (since a. we compare the cells independently and not the whole row-mutation, and b. we don't keep a write time on non-expiring cells that could use to break the tie more elegantly)

Reviewer: Exactly, which is why I'm saying that it's not a great idea to have wording that suggests we can always choose "which insert prevails".

> timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which of the inserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>`).

Reviewer 2: System behavior **must** be documented. Period! There is nothing worse and "undefined behavior".
What users should or should not do - leave to users to decide.
If you are personally so against some particular practices you are welcome to write a "Best Practices" article and reference it from the document page mentioned above. 
I suggest we continue this discussion on the PR that adds this article.

> timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which of the inserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>`).

Author: I can drop the patch that updates the documentation from this series if it's still controversial.
I think it's okay to document our behavior, but we should still be careful to be clear about what we want and can guarantee v.s. what we consider as implementation details that are subject to change, and also timing-sensitive so may produce different result due to server time-skew and/or low resolution of ttl - and so we advise the users not to step into those grey areas.

> timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which of the inserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>`).

Author: Added disclaimer in v6

> timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which of the inserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>`).

Reviewer 3: What about 

> What if someone relied on "the lexicographically bigger value prevails"?

The old behavior was documented, so a user could have "decided" to rely on it.

> timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which of the inserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>`).

Author: I see your point, but what exactly do you think we should do?

> timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which of the inserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>`).

Reviewer: I agree with @tgrabiec, I think we can document that if a user does two writes with the same timestamp, the result MAY be a mixed version of the two writes - without explain exactly which extenuating circumstances (such as TTL and conflicting writes more than one second apart) may ensure that the conflict will result in one of the two writes but not n a mix.

I'd love to have a developer-oriented documentation (in docs/dev/) for the conflict resolution details, but I don't think users should make use of these details (and if they did, now with this PR, they will be frustrated because the details changed).

  implicitly set by the coordinator by default, when the `USING TIMESTAMP` update parameter is absent.
  Scylla ensures that query timestamps created by the same coordinator node are unique (even across different shards
  on the same node). However, timestamps assigned at different nodes are not guaranteed to be globally unique.
  Note that with a steadily high write rate, timestamp collision is not unlikely. If it happens, e.g. two INSERTS or UPDATES

>   have the same timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which of the upserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>` for more information):

Author: Good point.  I'll phrase it closer to the original phrase that referred to the individual cells as the unit of comparison.

>   have the same timestamp, a tie-breaking algorithm determines which of the upserts prevails (see :ref:`update ordering <update-ordering>` for more information):

Author: improved in v6

- ``TIMEOUT``: specifies a timeout duration for the specific request.
  Please refer to the :ref:`SELECT <using-timeout>` section for more information.

.. _update-ordering:

Update ordering
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The fundamental rule for ordering multiple inserts or updates to a cell
is that the cell with the highest timestamp wins.

Otherwise, if cells have the same timestamp:

Dead cells win over live cells; and if both cells are deleted, the one with the later deletion time prevails.

If both cells are alive, their expiration time is examined.
Expiring cells win over live cells as they will become tombstones at some future date
and so, going by the rule above, they should be preferred over live cells.

If both cells are expiring, the one with the latest expiration time wins;
and if they have the same expiration time (in whole second resolution),

> their write time is derived from the expiration time less the remaining time-to-live

Author: sigh, we shouldn't get into the gory technical details, but you're technically correct.  It's the ttl used when applying the cell.

and the one that was written at a later time prevails.

Finally, if both cells are live and not expiring, or have the same expiration time and remaining time-to-live,
the cell with the lexicographically bigger value prevails.

Note that when a TTL is used and multiple columns are INSERTed or UPDATEed using the same timestamp,

> SELECTing those columns will return cells picked from only one of those upserts, that has the latest expiration time,

Author: so should we mention this at all?
since we have so many gotchas to this "feature" it's very hard for the application to make use of it anyhow.

- ``TIMEOUT``: specifies a timeout duration for the specific request.
  Please refer to the :ref:`SELECT <using-timeout>` section for more information.

.. _update-ordering:

Update ordering
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The fundamental rule for ordering multiple inserts or updates to a cell
is that the cell with the highest timestamp wins.

Otherwise, if cells have the same timestamp, Scylla implements the following
tie-breaking algorithm.

DISCLAIMER: The algorithm may be subject to change.
The actual results depend on real-time differences between the cluster servers'

> clocks and is limited by the 1-second resolution of the TTL value.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
clocks and are limited by the 1-second resolution of the TTL value.
```

Therefore, applications are discouraged from relying on the details of this algorithm.
Reliable serialization can be achieved using unique write TIMESTAMP
and using :doc:`Lightweight Transactions (LWT) </using-scylla/lwt>` to ensure atomicity of
:ref:`INSERT <insert-statement>`, :ref:`UPDATE <update-statement>`, and :ref:`DELETE <delete_statement>`.

The first tie-breaking rule when two cells have the same write timestamp is that
dead cells win over live cells; and if both cells are deleted, the one with the later deletion time prevails.

If both cells are alive, their expiration time is examined.
Cells that are written with a non-zero TTL (either implicit, as determined by
the table's default TTL, or explicit, ``USING TTL``) are due to expire
TTL seconds after the time they were written (as determined by the coordinator,
and rounded to 1 second resolution). That time is the cell's expiration time.

> When cells expire they become tombstones, shadowing any data written with a write timestamp

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When cells expire, they become tombstones, shadowing any data written with a write timestamp
```

less than or equal to the timestamp of the expiring cell.
Therefore, cells that have an expiration time win over cells with no expiration time.

If both cells have an expiration time, the one with the latest expiration time wins;
and if they have the same expiration time (in whole second resolution),
their write time is derived from the expiration time less the original time-to-live value
and the one that was written at a later time prevails.

Finally, if both cells are live and have no expiration, or have the same expiration time and time-to-live,
the cell with the lexicographically bigger value prevails.

Note that when multiple columns are INSERTed or UPDATEed using the same timestamp,
SELECTing those columns might return a result that mixes cells from either upsert

> if both upserts have no expiration time, or their expiration time and ttl are the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This may happen when both upserts have no expiration time or their expiration time and TTL are the
```

> same, in whole second resolution; as cell selection would be based on the cell values

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
same (in whole second resolution). In such a case, cell selection will be based on the cell values
```

- ``TIMEOUT``: specifies a timeout duration for the specific request.
  Please refer to the :ref:`SELECT <using-timeout>` section for more information.

.. _update-ordering:

Update ordering
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ref:`INSERT <insert-statement>`, :ref:`UPDATE <update-statement>`, and :ref:`DELETE <delete_statement>`
operations are ordered by their ``TIMESTAMP``.

Ordering of such changes is done at the cell level, where each cell carries a write ``TIMESTAMP``,
other attributes related to its expiration when it has a non-zero time-to-live (``TTL``),
and the cell value.

The fundamental rule for ordering cells that insert, update, or delete data in a given row and column
is that the cell with the highest timestamp wins.

However, it is possible that multiple such cells will carry the same ``TIMESTAMP``.
There could be several reasons for ``TIMESTAMP`` collision:

> 1. Benign collision can be caused by "replay" of a mutation, e.g. due to client retry, or due to internal processes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Benign collision can be caused by "replay" of a mutation, e.g., due to client retry, or due to internal processes.
```

Author: fixed in v8

> In such case the cells are equivalent and any of them can be selected, arbitrarily.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In such cases, the cells are equivalent, and any of them can be selected arbitrarily.
```

Author: fixed in v8

> 2. ``TIMESTAMP`` collisions might be normally caused by parallel queries that are served

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* ``TIMESTAMP`` collisions might be normally caused by parallel queries that are served
```

Author: fixed in v8

by different coordinator nodes. The coordinators might calculate the same write ``TIMESTAMP``
based on their local time in microseconds.

> 1. Collisions might also happen with user-provided timestamps, if the application does not guarantee

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Collisions might also happen with user-provided timestamps if the application does not guarantee
```

Author: fixed in v8
